=head1 NAME

WebAPI::DBIC - A composable RESTful JSON+HAL API to DBIx::Class schemas using roles, Web::Machine and Path::Router

=head1 DESCRIPTION

WebAPI::DBIC provides the parts you need to build a feature-rich RESTful JSON web
service API backed by DBIx::Class schemas. It also provides a PSGI file that
gives you an instant web service for any DBIx::Class schema with a single command.

WebAPI::DBIC features include:

* Uses the JSON+HAL (Hypertext Application Language) lean hypermedia type

* Supports safe robust multi-related-record CRUD transactions

* Built on the strong foundations of L<Web::Machine> and L<Path::Router>

* Built as fine-grained roles for maximum reusability and extensibility

=head2 HAL - Hypertext Application Language

The Hypertext Application Language hypermedia type (or HAL for short)
is a simple JSON format that gives a consistent and easy way to hyperlink
between resources in your API.

Adopting HAL makes the API explorable, and its documentation easily
discoverable from within the API itself.  In short, it will make your API
easier to work with and therefore more attractive to client developers.

A JavaScript "HAL Browser" is included in the WebAPI::DBIC distribution.
(WebAPI::DBIC doesn't yet offer direct support for documentation resources.)

APIs that adopt HAL can be easily served and consumed using open source
libraries available for most major programming languages. It's also simple
enough that you can just deal with it as you would any other JSON.

See L<http://stateless.co/hal_specification.html> for more details.

=head1 STATUS

The WebAPI::DBIC code has been in production use for over a year, however it's
only recently (July 2014) been open sourced so it's still lacking in packaging,
documentation, tests etc.

It's also likely to undergo a period of refactoring now there are more
developers contributing and the code is being applied to more domains.

=cut
